TUE Scoring eSports for Engineers v. 4.0

Save your replay file after each race.  These files are stored in
TUE/WP/drive_c/Sierra/GPL/replay.  Copy your .rpy files, along with
setup files, screenshot .png files showing your games and analysis to
the TUE/afterGameReport directory, calculate your score as described
below, and then enter your score using launcher.py

RANK

Bronze:

Run ./replay.sh. Choose File/Add replay lap. In the list look for
replays with the prefix “fs_”.  These are benchmark replays made by
the expert Grand Prix Legends driver Ferdinand Schulze.  Choose a
track which has a fs_ Schulze replay available.  If you are new to sim
racing, start with Watkins Glen, one of the shortest tracks.

In the unlikely event that you’ve already practiced with all the
dozens of car/track combinations for which there is a Schulze replay,
go through them again in the same order.

Now run ./gpl-demo.sh and make sure the 67 carset is chosen.  Select
your chosen track.  (If this track is not part of the 67 season,
select the Seasons button to add it.  In the season manager window,
select your track on the left, the 67 season on the right, and then
press the top middle button to add your track.  You’ll also want to
load Schulze’s setup file for that track. (Note: for a more realistic
driving experience, use the 67x carset instead of the 67 carset.  In
this case you will not be able to use the Schulze' setup, but you will
have several other setups from which to choose.)

Total your own best times on this track, then compare to Ferdinand
Schulze’s time on the same time.

score={1-3*(your lap time - Schulze’s lap time in seconds)/Schulze’s
lap time}*.5, if score>.5 then score=.5, if score<0 then score=0

Silver:

Run a full race, using a different carset each time you attempt the
Silver task.  If you’ve used all the carsets, cycle through the
carsets again.  Start with the original ‘67 carset, followed by the
‘55 carset and‘66, then ‘67 Sports Cars, then ‘65, then ‘67x, then
1966 Can Am driving the moveable wing Chap 2F, then ‘67 F2.  Also
cycle through the tracks, not returning to the same track until you’ve
visited all the tracks.  Start Goodwood ‘65, then Watkin’s Glen, then
Spa67, brands67, targa, and Isle of Man.  Choose a race type such that
the race length is approximately one hour.  Faux ABS (engaging both
brake and throttle during turns to exploit the lack of brake fade
modeling in all carsets except ‘55) is not allowed.  Use the default
36 FPS frame rate, as the AI is weaker if the frame rate is 60 FPS.
Select 8 computer opponents.  Before each race, randomize the list of
computer drivers so you face different opponents in each race via:
./randomizeDrivers.sh

Where r is your rank at the finish of the race (1 for 1st place, 2 for
2nd place etc.)  score={(15/14-r/14)*.75, if score > 0.75, then
score=0.75, if score<0 then score=0

Gold:

Same as silver, but tune the brake balance, suspension, differential
etc. yourself, starting from the default setup.  Create your own
completely new setup rather than making small changes to an existing
setup - change at least 6 setup parameters, each by at least 10% from
any existing setup.  At Spa you will need a stiff setup with gearing
optimized for top speed, at Brands Hatch you will want a softer setup
with gearing tuned for best acceleration.  Select 10 computer
opponents.  Before each race, randomize the list of computer drivers
so you face different opponents in each race via:
./randomizeDrivers.sh

Where r is your rank at the finish of the race (1 for 1st place, 2 for
2nd place etc.)  score={(11/10-r/10), if score>1 then score=1, if
score<0 then score=0

PROJECT SCORE

2 points for reading Ian Korf’s book, “You Suck at Racing: A Crash
Course for the Novice Driver”

1 point for skimming all documentation in the TUE directory

2 points for reading the documentation in the setupGuides directory,
developing a new setup, and testing it on the two test tracks (the
skidpad track and the complex track in the 67 season)

2 points for finishing a 67SC sports car race with Pit Stop and
Keypress selected in GEM with 15 cars or more participating, where you
beat at least 5 cars with AI speed set to 2 in GEM.

2 points for finishing in the top 25% of an iGor race with at least 10
drivers participating.  To join such a race, select iGor from the GEM
screen.  (you may need to join a GPL league to participate in the
race)

1 point for finishing 10 iGor races.  In GEM simply click on “iGor” to
see available races.  If there are none available, start one of your
own, selecting a car and track you haven’t used before, or haven’t
used often.


Non-free Alternative

gpl-demo can be replaced with the commercial racing sim rFactor 1,
along with add-on ‘67 car mod F1 Legends Racing and the add-on GPL era
tracks such as FDsign Spa58 Rfactor and RC GoodwoodRevival 2016.  Of
the many commercial racing sims, rFactor 1 is chosen because in can be
purchased on DVD and run with no internet connection, and because of
its good car physics and tire modeling.  Though designed for MS
Windows, rFactor1 can be run on Ubuntu 20.04 linux/wine 5.0 linux
using winetricks dxvk.
