WED Scoring eSports for Engineers v. 4.0

Save your Chess games as .pgn files.  Copy these .pgn files, along
with screenshot .png files showing your games and analysis to the
WED/afterGameReport directory, calculate your score as described
below, and then enter your score using launcher.py

RANK

Bronze:

Put leela chess zero on its weakest setting by using a
Versus/Temperature of 1 and a Versus/TempDecayMoves of Infinite in
Nibbler, and also by selecting in Nibbler Engine/Select Weights File …
one of the smallest weight files in WED/INSTALL/otherWeights.  The
smallest weight files are tinygyal-8.pb.gz, meangirl-7.pb and
evilgyal-6.pb.gz.

In SCID you may also load the INSTALL/200401smallChessDotCom.si4
master games database, open the SCID Windows/Tree Window and pick
opening moves based on moves played from that position in the master
database as you play.  (Pick a move randomly from the list shown in
the tree window, rolling dice to choose from the list).  This leads
you to try many different openings, never playing the same opening
twice.  Until you reach a novel position, the SCID database guides you
through the opening.

After finishing the nibbler chess game, save the game as a .pgn file.

Next, you will annotate your game.  The delta between an analysis
engine’s best move and your move is a useful metric of human player
performance.  To calculate this for chess, play a game against nibbler
and save the resulting pgn file.  Now load this into scid, with
stockfish set as analysis engine #1. Select the first move in the
notation window, then open the engine #1 analysis window and select
the annotate icon.  (Note that you can make a similar analysis of a
Weiqi game using ./gorevewpartner.sh in place of ./scid.sh, see FRI).

Annotate the game as follows.

1. Run ./scid.sh, load your .pgn game (or copy and paste it from
nibbler to scid using the clipboard).

2. In scid, load the stockfish analysis engine.

3. In the notation window, right click and remove all variations and
comments

4. In the analysis window, choose "annotate" (the notepad icon) and
set the blunder threshold to 2.  Annotate your game.

5. In scid save your annotated .pgn file (the easiest way to do this
is to copy to the clipboard, then past into a text editor.)

6. Copy the annotated .pgn file to WED/

7. Examine the annotations created by the stockfish engine.  Count the
number of times stockfish proposed an alternate to one of your moves.
This is the number of blunders you committed.  Where this number of
blunders is b, your score is

score= (1-b/5)*.5, if score>.5 then score=.5, if score<0 then score=0.

Note that you are being measured not be whether you won or lost, but
by how many blunders you made.  Even if you made a lot of blunders and
got a low score, your nibbler deep learning opponent may have made
more (or bigger!) blunders and lost the game.

Silver:

Follow the nibbler and scid steps for the Bronze level above, but in
step (4) above set a less forgiving blunder threshold of 1 in the
annotate window.

After stockfish has analyzed your entire game, count the number of
variations it has added in the notation window.  This is the number of
moves for which stockfish thinks a blunder cost you at least a pawn.

Examine each blunder as reported by stockfish.  For example if you are
playing white and stockfish evaluates the position after your move as
worth, say, -2.05, i.e. black is ahead by the equivalent of two pawns
of material.  If instead you had played stockfish’s preferred move,
white would be ahead by, for example, more than a pawn.  Thus the
delta is -2.05-1.25=-3.30.  For each of your moves where the delta was
less than or equal to -5, a major blunder, add 5 to b.  Thus if you
made only one blunder, but the blunder was to drop your queen with a
delta was -9, then for that game b=6.

score is {1-b/10}*.75, with maximum score capped at .75, is score<0,
then set score=0


Gold:

score = 1-Temperature, where Temperature is the lowest Nibbler
temperature at which you’ve beaten Leela Chess Zero in the last 30
days with the 591226.pb.gz weight file and where the first time
control was at least 30 minutes for each player.


PROJECT SCORE

1 point for learning all the features of SCID and nibbler

1 point for reading (or skimming, for introductory chapters) Lev
Alburt’s Comprehensive Chess Course Vol. 1 and II.  (1988)

1 point for reading Yasser Seirawan’s “Winning Chess Strategies”
(2005)

1 point for reading Sunil Weeramantry’s “Best Lessons of a Chess
Coach”, McKay (1993)

1 point for reading Matthew Sadler’s book “Game Changer” about Alpha
Chess Zero (2019)

1 point for reading Nakamura’s “Bullet Chess”, Russell (2009)

