INTRODUCTION

Welcome to eSports for Engineers version 4.0!

This is an exciting time for realistic simulation games (hereafter
“sims”) as more quality free sims become available on linux.  eSports
for Engineers provides a challenging sim for each day of the week, all
usable on a mid-range 5 year old linux PC.  These aren’t the usual
multiplayer fantasy games, they’re sims, in that they realistically
reproduce some kind of contest that existed in the real world before
there were computers.  In playing any of these sims, you are
recreating a historical event.  All games in this package run offline,
without need for internet access.

By providing linux installers, launchers and documentation for classic
old sims, eSports for Engineers brings a new level of depth and
quality to free, offline linux gaming.

The realistic simulation games described here recreate a real-world
experience, and are continually augmented by open source volunteer
efforts.  That’s why these sims keep getting better as the years go
by.  Flightgear, Grand Prix Legends, Mig Alley, Battle of Britain and
Falcon 4.0 are all two decades old, far past the shelf life of most
software.  Yet now, thanks to advances in linux and wine, these sims
run better then ever.  If you're already setting aside time every day
for a treadmill or exercise bike workout, you can play these
challenging sims during that time for a combined mind-body workout.

INSTALLATION STEPS

1. Install Ubuntu 20.04 LTS linux. During the installation, on the
"Updates and other software" screen, select "Install third-party
software for graphics and Wi-Fi hardware and other media formats".
(Installing third party software during Ubuntu 20.04 LTS install can
lead to a warning that the install failed - ignore it.  If this
happens, the first time you install packages via sudo apt install
... you're likely to see a prompt to insert a cdrom.  If that happens,
issue this command: "sudo sed -i 's/deb cdrom/#deb cdrom/g'
/etc/apt/sources.list").

Optional: instead of automatically installing 3rd party software, at a
terminal prompt after install issue the commands "sudo ubuntu-drivers
devices", followed by "sudo ubuntu-drivers autoinstall" and reboot

Create a new Ubuntu 20.04 LTS partition, with size at least 100
Gigabytes, as the base games package takes up at least 45.6 Gigabytes, fully
installed. (Installed size depends somewhat on the version of wine
you're using and what optional features you install).  Future versions
of wine will probably take up somewhat more disk space.  Optional
upgrades, which are not required to play esports for engineers, could
increase disk space needed to as much as 200 Gigabytes.

2. unpack the tar file: tar xzf esports-for-engineers-v40.tar.gz In
the esports-for-engineers-v40 directory run the script

./ubuntu_20_04_LTS_PackageInstall.sh

This will print out the commands you'll need to install libraries and
utilites needed by the games.  Copy and paste these commands one by
one into a terminal window to run the commands.

There are three parts to this - first, installing a large number of
repository packages, second, installing the latest version of wine
(winehq-staging), and third, installing flightgear and 5 add-on
aircraft. Steps 1 and 3 take about 15 minutes each.

Concerning wine - the simplest approach is to use winehq-staging for
all the games.  This gives the sharpest graphics and, in some cases,
provides online help that is not available with earlier versions of 
wine.  On the other hand, winehq-staging is slower, takes more disk
space, and is not as well tested as older versions of wine.  All the
games except the THU flight simulators will run with wine-stable,
so some may prefer using wine-stable except for the THU games.  The
wine-development version is intermediate between the two, and will
run every game except THU/battleOfBritain.sh.  Switching between
wine versions is done with these commands:

sudo apt install -y wine-stable

sudo apt install -y wine-development

sudo apt install --install-recommends winehq-staging

3. double check that you are using the fastest graphics card drivers.
If the command lsmod | grep nouveau returns any output, it means you
are using the slow generic nouveau graphics driver.  With the nouveau
driver frame rate will be lower in the 3D sims, if they work at all.
Load the correct proprietary driver for your graphics card!

WORKAROUNDS AND TIPS FOR EACH GAME

Each of these sims has its own special magic, and, in most cases, it’s
own idiosyncrasies when it comes to running on linux.  Great strides
have been made recently in getting these old Microsoft Windows sim
running smoothly on linux, but for each sim there are workarounds to
remember and, often, configurations to set up prior to playing.

Here’s what you need to know before you tackle the complexity of these
sims.  For each day of the week, there is a score sheet setting
milestones to help you learn and track your progress.  Each day you
can elect to pursue a Bronze, Silver or Gold task (in increasing order
of difficulty) and, if you choose, complete recommended projects as
well.  Run ./launcher.py in the base directory to select games and
enter your scores.  

IMPORTANT NOTE: you must save your game result or you will not be allowed to enter a score.  For Bridge, Chess and Weiqi, choose save game and save the
game in the afterGameReport directory.  If playing Chess, and if using SCID to annotate a game you'll need to copy to the clipboard and paste into a text editor, then save this text file with a .pgn suffix because SCID does not save .pgn files directly.  Nibbler can save .pgn files.

For the TUE sim, after
exiting the 3D view, find the playback controls below the picture.   Click on the folder icon that is second from right on the playback control bar to save a replay.  

For the THU flight sims, set gun camera in preferences to "ON".  When exiting 3D view, select "Replay", type a new file name in the Current File box, and select "Save".  To turn off recording during uneventful parts of your flight, press "v" in Mig Alley or "c" in Battle of Britain.  Press the same key again again to start recording again into the same file.

For the SAT sim, select "BRIEFING" and then "PRINT" to save the briefing in the afterGameReport directory.  When in the 3D view, type "F" to record the flight.  Type "F" to toggle the recording on and off.

Choose export in launcher.py to create a tar file of your scores and supporting game files to share with others.  To unpack a tar file and access the files within it, type "tar xzf <name of tar file>".  To compare scores, send a link to your exported tar file, along with the verification code, to the eSports for Engineers forum on fostodon:

https://fosstodon.org/@esports_for_engineers

Now for a whirlwind tour of the sims, and of the workarounds you’ll
need to play them.

The easiest way to start playing the sims is to use the launcher; run
the ./launcher.py script in the esports-for-engineers-v40 directory.
There’s one (or more) sim for each day of the week, so let’s take it
one day at a time:

MON:

Once wine is installed, simply select MON in ./launcher.py or execute
the shell script in the MON directory as follows:

./wBridge5.sh

to run the free wBridge 5 Contract Bridge program, a worthy opponent
that has won multiple computer Bride world championships.  The first
time you run this or other wine games, you may be asked whether to
install mono and gecko.  Install gecko but not mono.  (The one
exception is the optional BMS flight sims, for which you want both
mono and gecko.)

Run

./bcalc.sh

from launcher.py or the command line to run Bridge analysis software.

MON WORKAROUNDS: none, but if you install the additional linux
packages per the instructions in the MON directory, bcalc will
automatically switch to a native linux version with sharper graphics.
(These packages are automatically installed by the
ubuntu_20_04_LTS_PackageInstall.sh script).

TUE:

If the name “Grand Prix Legends” doesn’t ring a bell, read the article
“Why I Loved Hardcore Racing sim Grand Prix Legends, the story of the
racing sim that won’t die” at this link:

https://www.pcgamer.com/why-i-loved-hardcore-racing-sim-grand-prix-legends/

Statistical analysis has recently confirmed the claim made on Grand
Prix Legends (GPL)’s release back in 1998 that the old open-wheel F1
racecars in the sim were the hardest ever cars to drive:

https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2020/10/17/engineers-not-racers-are-the-true-drivers-of-success-in-motor-sport

After practicing with the dozens of different cars and tracks, delve
deeper by reading about car setups in the DOC/setupGuides folder, then
practice with different setups on the skidpad tracks.  Practise
driving with low grip on the front wheels, make a few donuts by
exceeding the traction budget on the rear wheels, experiment with
pushing vs. loose, soft vs. stiff setups, etc. on the skidpad and
complex test tracks (under 67 season).

TUE WORKAROUNDS: GPL loses keyboard focus regularly; when this occurs,
typing regular characters on the keyboard will have no effect.  To
counter this, you need to get accustomed to grabbing the keyboard
focus back again via:

1. use <ALT> TAB and <ALT><SH> TAB to highlight the window in which
GPL is running

2. press <ALT> F6 to restore keyboard focus to the GPL window

Also note: press F10 (after restoring keyboard focus, see above) to
toggle between in-car view and chase view.  Stop the car and press
<ESC> ENTER to exit the GPL 3D view.  On the skidpad track your car
starts out embedded in a roadside barrier.  Free it by pressing <SH>
R.  If that doesn’t work, exit the 3D view, re-enter and try <SH> R
again.

Note: GPL is the only sim in eSports for Engineers that seems to run
without adjustments on every recent linux distro.  If using a distro
other than Ubuntu, however, you may encounter a blurry text problem.
Run the supplied script file “runThisIfGPLTextUnreadable.sh” to fix
that.

WED:

WED brings us to the timeless game of chess, enhanced with the latest
artificial intelligence.  There are two AI sparing partners;
stockfish, running on the SCID chess platform, and, on the nibbler
platform, Leela Chess Zero.  Leela Chess Zero is an open source clone
of the world champion deep learning code Alpha Zero.

Stockfish has superhuman strength and plays in an inscrutable way
without ever making a blunder.  It’s no fun to play stockfish – use it
to analyze your games after you’ve sparred with a human-strength
version of Leela Chess Zero.  The deep learning “brain” of Leela Chess
Zero is it’s network, a file of numbers which determines its strength.
Start with the smallest network,
INSTALL/otherWeights/tinygyal-8.pb.gz, which will occasionally drop
pieces in a very human-like way.  To further reduce its strength, and
increase it’s spontaneity, set Versus/Temperature to 1 and
Versus/TempDecayMoves to Infinite in nibbler.

For an entertaining game, open the INSTALL/25000grandmasterGames.si4
grandmaster database in SCID, bring up Tree Window:
25000grandmasterGames, and during the opening, every time it’s your
turn in nibbler, roll a pair of dice, update the position in SCID and
use the number on the dice to choose your move from the grandmaster
moves listed in the SCID tree window.  That way you don’t have to
memorize openings, and you get a very different game every time.  When
you’ve run out of database moves it’s you against Leela Chess Zero.
After the game, copy the game from nibbler via File/Write PGN to
Clipboard and paste it into SCID via Edit/Copy Clipboard Text as PGN
game.  Score your game by setting the SCID Tools/Analysis Engine to
stockfish, setting the blunder threshold to 2 in SCID
Analysis:stockfish annotate, and thus using stockfish to analyze your
game.  Reviewing the game is a great way to learn, and is often
surprising.  Your score for WED is inversely proportional to the
number of blunders stockfish found in your play.

WED WORKAROUNDS: you will need to navigate to the Alpha Chess Zero
binary and tinygyal-8 (or other network file) from Nibbler.  Choose
Versus/Play this Color in Nibbler when you want Alpha Zero to move.
When Nibbler opens a dialog box it often puts it beneath the Nibbler
chess board window on the screen, so look for an occluded dialog box
with <ALT> TAB if Nibbler isn’t responding to your keyboard commands.
If Nibbler displays a solid black window, you may be using the wrong
version of wine.  Type

wine –version

to make sure you’re using wine version 5.5 or later with Nibbler

THU:

Now that Grand Prix Legends has taught you to pilot high-powered
vehicles in two dimensions, it’s time to up your game by adding
another dimension and a lot more backstory.  Install flightgear in
Ubuntu via

sudo apt install flightgear

Unless you’re very familiar with flight simulators, it’s a good idea
to start with takeoff and landing practice using the open source
flightgear simulator and the venerable Cessna 172P aircraft.  Later
you’ll be glad you learned how to manage the vertical velocity
indicator and how to “step on the ball” to prevent a spin.  Download
the other aircraft per the instructions, then progress from the Cessna
to the spitfire and bf109 in the Battle of Britain directory, and then
the F86 and MiG15 in the Mig Alley directory.  Learn the cockpit
instruments in these planes and practice startup, takeoff and landing.

The THU games are two classic flight and war simulators, Mig Alley and
Battle of Britain.  These two sims run on the same game engine and
share many commands and idiosyncrasies.  As with GPL, the historical
setting of these sims was chosen for maximum challenge.  The fighter
planes available during the Battle of Britain planes were underpowered
and cumbersome – imagine competing in an auto race while constantly
trying not to over-rev your engine in a car that has only two gears,
and you’ll have some idea of the cockpit workload of Battle of Britain
pilots.  These early planes used deer-rifle caliber ammunition, so the
best you could realistically hope for was to shoot a hole in the
radiator of your opponent and cripple him with a slow leak.  The
dogfighting AI is impressive, and you play the roles of both pilot and
general.

Mig Alley is like GPL in that you’re dealing with overpowered machines
which lack modern control systems.  It was the dawn of the jet age
before missiles, a period when many experimental technologies were
being put to the test for the first time.  The well-known Mig Alley
campaign was one of the first unscripted campaigns, set within the
historical context of the Korean war.  Each time you play Mig Alley
campaign, you recreate the air war in Korean based on your decisions
and performance.  Learn to zoom in on the 2D campaign map view and
turn on icons, e.g. troops and tanks, to study the evolving
battlefield situation before you start each mission.

THU WORKAROUNDS: For both Mig Alley and Battle of Britain, a dual
monitor setup is recommended.  Use the winehq-staging version of
wine. Set both monitors to their maximum resolutions, and set PC
Config/3D resolution and Campaign Resolution to 1280x1024 in Battle of
Britain.  In ./setWineDisplayResolution.sh graphics tab only the
"Allow The Window Manger To Control the Windows" should be selected.
Following all these steps should prevent graphics problems.

If you don't follow all these steps, here are some of the problems
you'll run in to: both sims place a black box over the 3D view window
in many situations - unless there is a second monitor, in which case
the black box is harmlessly displayed on the second monitor.  (Note:
since source code for both sims is available, this is probably easy to
fix.  See the Issues tab on the project github page.)

For Mig Alley, first check your wine configuration by running the
script

./setWineDisplayResolution.sh

Select the Graphics tab in the Wine configuration dialog.  The tic box
labeled "Allow The Window Manger To Control the Windows" should be
checked, the other tic boxes unchecked.  If you run into graphics
problems, you may want to try other settings in this tab - see the
DEBUG folder under the Mig Alley directory if needed.  (Briefly, if
you run into graphics glitches, try using a dual monitor setup.  If
that doesn't work, select "Allow the window manager to decorate
windows" and "Emulate virtual desktop" in the
./setWineDisplayResolution.sh Graphics tab.  Set virtual desktop size
to your max screen resoluion.

Any time you encounter graphics glitches in 3D view, press <ALT> X to
return to the 2D view.  The workarounds are the same for the other THU
sim, Battle of Britain.)

Next, check that you are using winehq-staging via

wine --version

Both THU sims run best with winehq-staging.  Mig Alley (but not Battle
of Britain) will run with wine-5.5, which is wine-development as of
this writing.


Again, to avoid graphics glitches, use a dual monitor setup for the
THU games.  Check that the monitors are set to max resolution via
right click/Display Settings on an empty Ubuntu desktop, or by running
the supplied script (try both methods - one or the other may not work
correctly with your monitors).

Note: If the Mig Alley display is occluded by a black screen in a dual
monitor setup, that's probably because your monitors are not
configured correctly; try using different monitors.  If unable to
solve this problem, turn on virtual desktop using
./setWineDisplayResolution.sh and set your monitors to maximum
resolution, which you can do via: ./delayedMonitorReset.sh 0

When in the 2D campaign view in either sim, close any extra dialog
boxes before selecting a recon photo.  You may not be able to click on
the recon photo camera movement controls.  If this happens, use number
key commands instead:

1. rotate recon photo clockwise, press 1 again to stop rotation

2. rotate counter-clockwise

3. zoom in

4. zoom out

5. reset zoom

0. return to 2D campaign view

Number keys work similarly on the replay screen.

Note that the mouse is not used in Mig Alley 3D view - use num pad
keys to change the view (or use a head tracking device - see
THU/MigAlley/DOC for details.)

This should not be a problem if you've followed all the recommended
steps, but whenever you get a chance, set or reset the resolution in
Mig Alley (via PREFERENCES) to 1024x768. Note that when using
winehq-staging the actual Mig Alley screen resolution will be higher
than 1024x768.


Before running Battle of Britain, check that you have the correct
version via

wine --version

As of January 2021 that version is wine-6.0 (Staging), but this will
change as winehq.org releases newer versions.  If using an earlier
version of wine issue the command:

sudo apt install --install-recommends winehq-staging

Run the shell script

./setWineDisplayResolution.sh

and open the Graphics tab to check that the tic mark configuration is
the same as for Mig Alley (see above).  If you run into graphics
glitches in 3D view you may want to try other settings here - see the
information in the Battle of Britain DEBUG directory for other
settings.

Note: Useful keys when flying Mig Alley are <ALT> F6 to see a view
from the padlocked aircraft, and num pad Enter to glance at your
instrument panel.  In Battle of Britain, use <CTRL> i to see a view
from the padlocked aircraft.  In a dogfight it can be useful to fly
using this view along with the orientation aids in the upper right and
left corners of the 3D view.

FRI:

FRI WORKAROUNDS: KaTrain expects to run on your graphics card (GPU),
so install opencl per the instructions for this purpose.  The
standalone katago binary does not use the GPU, but rather uses
openblass on your CPU; again, refer to the detailed instructions to
install all the needed libraries (running the
ubuntu_20_04_LTS_PackageInstall.sh script does this for you).  Even if
you can't configure katago, you can still play against gnugo, but
without the benefit of annotation heatmaps. (Note that for chess,
banksiaGui.sh in the WED directory provides a numerical heatmap
overlay for Leela Chess Zero.)

SAT:

SAT introduces the most famous combat flight sim lineage of them all,
Falcon 4.0.  The free and open source version, Free Falcon 6, is best
approached after practicing with the flightgear f16.  Flightgear uses
simplified commands and models perhaps 1/3 of the aircraft’s systems,
so it’s a good place to start.  Practice landing and takeoffs with
flightgear, and learn all the commands provided by this simpler take
on the f16.  Also practice taking off and landing with the flightgear
MiG 21, but don’t study the MiG 21 avionics as preparation for Free
Falcon, because for simplicity all aircraft in the games derived from
Falcon 4.0 use f16 avionics).

Note that the first time you run Free Falcon, it unpacks and inflates
a lot of files before starting.  The Tacview utility tracks all the
activity that occurred during a mission or TE (tactical engagement for
training.)  Free Falcon includes two historically accurate campaigns,
one (Israeli Classic) featuring the decade of Arab-Israeli wars from
roughly 1970 to 1980 and the other the 1990’s Balkan’s conflict.

SAT WORKAROUNDS: Free Falcon crashes in the Israel Classic theater
when you start a Yom Kippur or Invasion of Lebanon campaign.  As a
workaround, several campaigns from these wars were started on MS
Windows and then saved for use here.  You can choose from among saved
campaigns (see CAMPAIGN/SAVED) where you fly for an Arab country or
for Israel, and you also have a choice among different aircraft and
roles.  Note that Free Falcon/Isreali Classic does not crash in the
Yom Kippur campaign, so this is a good campaign to try first.

Optional: there are three more recent versions of Falcon 4.0 available
as a separate download for a small fee.  Like GPL, Falcon 4.0
continues to improve two decades after its original release.  The
modern versions of Falcon 4.0 are not free, as you must buy a copy of
the original Falcon 4.0 game to unlock the installers, but this
original game can be downloaded for a minimal price.  Links to three
versions of the current Falcon 4.0 project, Benchmark Sims, are
provided in SAT/DOC/AdvancedFalcon4.pdf.

BMS 4.32 is (relatively) simple, but still a big step up in terms of
graphics and realism from Free Falcon; it also includes a historical
Kuwait campaign.  It uses 20 GB of disk space and runs on modest
hardware.

BMS 4.33 is more complex and realistic and comes with historical
Vietnam and Somalia campaigns.  It takes 40 GB of disk space and has
roughly 10% lower frame rate than BMS 4.32 on the same hardware.

The best combat flight simulator or any type available today may well
be BMS 4.35, which ratchets up the complexity, realism and overall
quality still further.  It achieves this by using DX11 with the latest
wine vulkan drivers.  It takes 40 GB of disk space and has lower
frame rate than the others, but runs adequately on a 5 year old PC.

One last tip: although the winehq-staging version of wine should run
all the games, if you run into problems loading wine games you can
switch to a more stable, tested version of wine via

sudo apt install -y wine-development

This older version of wine should run all the games reasonably well
except THU/Battle of Britain and the optional flight sim BMS 4.35.

installation is done, cd to the esports-for-engineers-v40 directory
and type

./launcher.py

to play the games and track your weekly score.



